Hello and welcome to Taiwan Talks. I'm
Ian Kavak coming to you from National
Central University. Early this month,
the world watched as humans traveled
further into space than they've ever
been before. This week, NASA is sending
its first astronaut to Taiwan since the
1980s. Ahead of that incredible journey
around the moon, the Aremis astronauts
were trained by Chel Lingren, astronaut
and physician. He speaks to us today
exclusively on Taiwan Talks. Ch Lingren,
deputy director of human flight services
at NASA. It's a huge privilege.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Now, Taiwan Talks usually discusses
geopolitics, but today we're offering a
different take. One that's apolitical,
human, and deeply personal because this
is a story about a boy. A boy who loved
Star Wars and who pursued his lifelong
dream. It's also a story about the
journey after that dream is crushed.
Most of all, it's a story about
resilience, about how teamwork and human
connections can make the impossible
possible and coming full circle, how we
can live our dream. Dr. Lingren, so um
you're causing quite a stir in Taiwan
because you're not just an astronaut,
you're also half Taiwanese and Taiwan
born. What's it like to be back?
>> It's such a joy to be back. you know,
uh, I was born here, lived here for two
years, uh, as a young child. Have had
the opportunity to visit family uh, in
the 80s over the summer. Uh, the last
time I was here was in '94 as a part of
a as a language exchange. And so, it's
been a long time. Um, but during my
space flights, looking down at the
Earth, looking at places where I've
lived, places where I have family,
places where I want to visit, I always
looked for Taiwan. just this beautiful
>> and we all saw that photo that you that
you sent of of of Taiwan from space.
>> Beautiful jewel uh in the in the Pacific
and enshrouded in mist and so grateful
now to be back on the ground uh at this
place that I was able that is so much a
part of my past
>> and um just enamored by the views from
space. You're here to encourage Taiwan
space industry, the next generation of
scientists, engineers, and perhaps even
astronauts.
>> Absolutely. Um it is such a unique
opportunity, such a privilege to get to
serve as an astronaut, to have the
opportunity to to live and work in
space. Um and so it's a privilege to
share that to share that unique
experience really the human experience
of of living and working um in low Earth
orbit and to see the Earth from that
perspective. And so to share that
message uh to encourage
um students, investigators, researchers
on the importance of space, the
importance of partnership especially as
we are looking to return to the moon uh
to to establish sustainable presence and
then looking onto Mars and I believe
that Taiwan can be an important part of
that. M. So, so what is it that makes
NASA want to work with Taiwan and what
have you seen so far on this trip that's
impressed you?
>> You know, um NASA and the US is
interested in partnering with countries
all around the world. Finding partners
that are that that can bring expertise
and experience to the table. uh we are
exploring for humanity and we want
humanity the broad swath of partnerships
to be uh a part of this exploration. Um
this has been an amazing trip to visit
uh this university to see the experience
they have in space and really to learn
about Taiwan's expertise um and
technology. Those are pieces that can be
a critical part of future exploration.
>> Okay. And just for our Taiwanese
audience, have you managed to do
anything very Taiwanese like eating
stinky tofu or visiting a temple?
>> Uh, absolutely. So, we did a three-hour
walking tour on the very first day
starting at Lan Temple.
>> Um, made our way from uh all the way to
the Chien Kaishek Memorial. Uh, we've
definitely taken in some bubble tea and
uh and some of the local food and it's
been an absolute joy um to explore. And
were there any connection to your
childhood eating those foods again?
>> Well, I remember very clearly especially
when we visited in the 80s when I was a
young child um roaming through the
market and seeing those little uh kind
of bread cakes shaped in the shape of
animals and those sorts of things. And
so seeing that again um while we were
walking just brought back so many
memories. Uh the other piece of
exploration that we did is we found we
went and found the um the hospital where
I was born and so connecting with that
that location was uh was very
meaningful.
>> So you've said that for as long as you
can remember you've wanted to be an
astronaut. And we're just showing now uh
a clip of three figurines that I
understand you take up into space.
>> So we've got my uh little R2, little
Luke Skywalker, and then Darth Vader.
All the original Star Wars figures.
They've got uh little coins of Velcro on
the back so that I don't lose them.
Everything tends to float away. And then
this is actually this the Luke Skywalker
that I broke I broke the head off of it
and my dad uh took like a little bolt
and and uh was able to drill out and put
it back on there for me. But these are
just uh for me just kind of sources of
uh inspiration what what inspired me to
to pursue uh space flight. And so kind
of a a cool full circle.
Can you describe to us or tell tell us
what in particular as a child that
really inspired you about Star Wars?
>> You know, I was inspired by science
fiction. Um, I'm a Star Wars kid. I
loved reading science fiction, but it
wasn't really until second grade my
teacher rolled a television into our
classroom and I got to see the very
first launch of the first space shuttle
in 1981. And that's when it clicked with
me that living and working in space
wasn't fantasy. wasn't science fiction
but a reality. And from that point on,
um, I was hooked.
>> In that interview that we showed, you
talk about how science fiction inspires
science fact. And so I wanted to go into
that a little bit more. Um, if
scientists and engineers are inspired by
movie makers and artists, what does that
say about the power of imagination and
its role in science or in space? Oh, I
think imagination
um is critical to the process, you know,
to be inspired by some some idea that a
writer um has
and then to see that on film, to want to
be a part of that and then someday to
see that come true. You know, Arth
Arthur C. Clark and the idea of uh
communication satellites
and that's where we are today and and so
um the things that we see when we were
young the things that we are inspired by
um are things that we pursue in
education and in our careers and so that
I think that circle is so important uh
to be inspired by the imagination of
others to make those things come true to
further inspire writers and then
engineers of the future. M yeah you
mentioned also C Clark and then there's
Jules Vern and even Star Trek.
>> Absolutely.
>> Let's talk about Optimus 2.
>> Yes.
>> So you worked intimately closely with
these astronauts preparing them for
their journey. You also as we know did
two space missions yourself um over 300
days in space. So as you watched the
crew and that you know making of
history, what were the emotions that you
yourself felt?
>> Oh boy. Uh so proud of this crew, so
proud of the team. Um so that crew
represents hundreds if not thousands of
uh people investing thousands if not
millions of hours in preparing for this
mission. Uh, and so so proud of the team
that that executed that that got the
crew safely around the back side of the
moon and back to Earth. Um, it was so
powerful and for anyone that watched
that crew work, communicate with the
Earth, expressed their views of the moon
as they were going around the backside
describing the the solar eclipse. Um
that is what makes human space flight so
compelling is the human element that
somebody from our species, one of our
friends, our colleagues, our teammates
is experiencing that and sharing their
thoughts and feelings of having gone
through that. Um that is why that
storytelling is what makes human space
flight so important. Following on from
that, um we hear about the profound
changes or the profound change that
astronauts have sort of um
psychologically
um as they look down more than 10,000
kilometers um onto Earth. Um can you
tell us about that as well as the
concept of Earth as our spaceship?
>> Absolutely. I think that your experience
with the over effect overview effect
really depends on what thoughts beliefs
you carry as you go on your mission.
Some people feel disconnected from the
earth, very alone. For myself, looking
back at the earth, I felt very
connected. But really the most profound
element was looking at the earth and its
absolute beauty. But recognizing that on
the space station, this vehicle that
provides us with air to breathe and food
to eat and the protection from from the
harsh environment outside, we spend 30%
of our time taking care of the space
station because if it breaks, the crew
inside dies. We depend on the space
station for our life. And then as you
look at the Earth, there is nothing like
it in our in our vicinity. It is and all
of humanity is there. It is humanity's
spaceship. But I think that very few of
us spend 30% of our time taking care of
this spaceship, spaceship earth. Um it
the resources are not inexhaustible.
They are limited. And the the
believing the belief that I came back
with is that we need to do a better job
taking care of humanity spaceship.
>> It's a privileged um position career u
to be an astronaut. Um, can you tell us
how NASA chooses particular astronauts
for these missions? I mean, for Arteimus
4, when humans will go back to the moon,
I expect every single astronaut in the
US would put their hand up. So, how do
they choose?
>> Absolutely. Yeah, it's very challenging.
Um, and you're absolutely right. It is a
privilege. It is absolute privilege to
to be able to serve as a NASA astronaut
to have that opportunity to live and
work in space. Um and you're absolutely
right that every every one of our
astronauts will be interested in being a
part of that atom Artemis landing. Um,
we have the benefit of choosing from the
very best and brightest into the
astronaut core. And we have the the
privilege of choosing the very best and
brightest and and those that have the
skill and expertise that is going to be
needed for that particular mission um to
be selected for for that landing
mission.
>> So, uh it'll be a difficult choice, but
we've got an amazing group of of uh
professionals to choose from. Would you
like to go yourself?
>> Oh, I'd love to.
>> The third mission that is that very rare
to go on three missions?
>> Um,
not necessarily. Uh, but at this point,
I'm serving in a leadership role and as
the deputy director of the flight
operations directorate. And so, um, my
priority is to serve where the agency
and the country needs me. And so, if
that's serving in leadership, that's
what I'll do. If they want to put me on
a a lunar mission, I'd love to do that
as well. So I want to get a feeling for
living and working in space and uh you
were away in international space center
for you know four to five months a long
period. Um tell me about um how space
takes a toll on your body.
>> Living in space existing in zero gravity
is really hard on the human body. It's
as if instead of spending 6 months in
space, you're laying flat in bed for 6
months, which results in muscle atrophy
or weakness, bone mineral loss, in
cardiovascular deconditioning, a
weakening of the heart and
cardiovascular system.
>> And also if you can look at that through
the fact that as you mentioned the next
destination will be Mars. How will that
change these impacts?
>> Absolutely. You know, I think that for
most of us, the biggest challenge of
being in space for 5, 6, 12 months is
really being away from our families. And
the team does an amazing job of allowing
us to connect with our families through
a phone system, through video chats, um
through uh care packages.
As I think about that long
duration flight to Mars, it will
continue to be even more challenging
because we're going to be further away
from the Earth, increasing our
communications latency. Um, we're not
going to have the Earth to look at every
day. Uh, but I have faith in our
psychological our behavioral health
support team, our mental health team
that will support us um as we undertake
that that challenge.
>> Okay. Your journey hasn't always been
smooth and I believe that this has also
shaped you as an astronaut. Um you
spoken about uh one of the um lowest
points in your life.
>> Well, my medical evaluation board met
and to my um surprise and dismay. Not
only was I not going to be permitted to
continue to fly, but they were
recommending that I be discharged from
the Air Force. This represented
the complete obliteration of a dream
that I had been working towards
for most of my life,
devastation.
If you describe that as being a cursed
day, yeah,
>> you know, the darkest day of your life.
Um,
>> but you see it now as a blessing in
disguise. I realized that that day, that
challenging day, was actually a blessing
because I wouldn't be here standing in
front of you today telling you about my
journey to the space. And so, I did well
in medical school and I graduated and
then chose to train in emergency
medicine. I did a second residency in
aerospace medicine to become a space
medicine specialist and then got a job
at NASA at Johnson Space Center working
as a flight surgeon, a doctor that takes
care of the astronauts. And a year into
that work, NASA announced a new
astronaut selection and I threw my hat
into the ring and had the great fortune
to be selected into the 2009 astronaut
class. Can you tell us about how your
mom might have helped you through this
and what influence she has been on your
career? Many people in Taiwan think that
she must be a tiger mom because you're
not just an astronaut, but you're also a
doctor. You have multiple degrees. You
have 24 years of cumulative um higher
education,
>> you know. uh so grateful to my parents
um
for their support and instruction.
Uh I would not describe my mom as a
tiger mom. Um what she did and what my
parents did was really support my
choices. Never telling me what I needed
to do. um but telling me if there was
something that I wanted to do, if I had
a goal that I just needed to work hard
um to to pursue it and then supported me
in pursuing that goal. So uh
I feel privileged and grateful um for
support the support that uh my parents
provided in um really providing the
environment for me to excel and uh
creating in me a joy for learning uh for
curiosity for exploration and enabling
me to pursue um this path that I've
pursued. And very finally, a shout out
to uh those in Taiwan as well as in the
Indo Pacific, our audience.
>> Um,
we just spoke to astronaut Chel Lingren
of NASA. And now we're speaking to
distinguished professor Lauren Chan, the
chair of National Central University
space and engineering department.
>> We are essentially
uh Dr. Lingren's first stop on his
public uh tour of Taiwan. So at National
Central University just we were
overjoyed when AIT reached out to us
about a month ago. And having an active
duty NASA astronaut visit is something
on almost on the magnitude of having a
foreign head of state visit. I mean it's
something where literally you have uh
the president or the vice president uh
meet and greet. And so being able to be
the first stop on his tour was a real
honor for us. And I think there is going
to be room in the future to follow up on
these uh connections, follow up on these
threads, and provide more opportunities
for future exchanges, but also potential
collaborations. It would be wonderful to
see a Taiwanese experiment or payload on
a future Aremis mission. It would be
wonderful if we could send more students
but also industry professionals and even
uh government agencies on factf finding
and exchange missions to NASA facilities
and vice versa.
>> So Dr. Lynford said that he was coming
over to inspire and to encourage Taiwan
space industry. Why is it that Taiwan
space industry is attracting this
international attention right now? Well,
Taiwan's space industry has grown
tremendously over the last six uh six or
seven years. So starting around well I
remember going to uh a very big uh space
expo satellite 2022 um four years ago
and that year we had uh was the first
time we had a Taiwan pavilion at that uh
particular uh exhibition in Washington
DC and at the time this is just when our
most recent burst of of activity in the
space industry started. We had several
Taiwanese companies uh show up and
exhibit, but I would say at the time a
lot of it was aspirational. Now, if you
look at say satellite 2026, the same
expo, we have Taiwanese companies going
and already they're showcasing products
that they are already selling. So, this
has been a very very major change. I
remember when I started at NCU in 2012,
at the time it was the Graduate
Institute of Space Science and it was
not a very popular department. The
running joke at the time was that a lot
of our students were the ones who
couldn't get into optics and photonics.
And so it was a very different
atmosphere in the department at the
time. I'm very happy to say that now our
department of space science and
engineering we have a very competitive
program. Our students who come in are
very motivated and at the same time we
are able to provide them with
opportunities that they would not be
able to get elsewhere. working on small
satellites, building Taiwan's first
lunar payload, meeting with
distinguished international guests,
visitors, scientists, and now an active
NASA astronaut. These are opportunities
they would not have been able to acquire
elsewhere. And that's something that
sets us apart.
>> And so for many countries, space is
about prestige. There's also the
commercial opportunities, but for
Taiwan, it's also very important for our
security. Can you explain why?
>> Absolutely. So space is what's often
considered uh space products are often
what are considered dual use products.
They can be used for civil applications.
They can be used for military
applications. Now space is important for
Taiwan from a na from a defense and
security perspective for a couple of
different reasons. first of all is
satellite remote sensing is an
incredibly important asset for
intelligence for monitoring what our
adversaries are doing in addition to
their existing scientific and civil
applications. Now in uh now uh when we
developed our second satellite uh I'm
sorry when Taiwan developed our second
formosat formosat 2 um that was a remote
sensing satellite and that was very
significant because it was a remote
sensing satellite that we would control.
We could control what we wanted to take
images of. We can acquire that directly
from our own satellite. That gives us
sovereign capability in terms of
satellite remote sensing. Now, if you
think about it, that make that makes a
lot of sense because if you're going to
buy from a commercial provider,
sometimes if you want to look at
something more sensitive, they may say
no. But if you have that capability,
then that's something that we can
control. And even if we buy from a
commercial provider, you can usually get
much better terms if they know that you
have that capability inhouse as well.
And so that's one aspect uh remote
sensing.
>> In terms of that, do we work with the US
on this aspect? Well, we do um uh work
with several um commercial companies in
the US and Europe where basically we use
their remote sensing satellites. We tell
them what we would like to task the
satellites to observe and then basically
when they fly overhead, our center for
space and remote sensing research here
at NCU will receive the data down linked
from uh the satellite, process it and
then apply it. So that is one uh
example. um in addition to uh so that
started with formosat 2 and it's
continued with our other uh indigenous
uh remote sensing satellites like
formosat 5 or uh formosat 8. Now um more
recently there's also been strong
interest in space from uh defense
consideration in terms of communications
robustness. So often times we don't
think about this, but all of Taiwan's
connections to the internet, the broader
world are through 15 submarine fiber
optic cables. These cables can be
damaged by natural uh events, but they
can also be cut by malicious actors. And
this has happened. We have seen several
um uh uh commercial or fishing vessels
flagged under a third country but
actually controlled by uh Chinese-based
companies or entities that have been
identified as essentially dragging their
anchors around where our fiber optic
cables come come ashore and cutting them
in many cases. The same thing has been
happening in Europe. Russian ships often
do the same thing in the Baltic Sea to
undersea cables for electrical power and
also for uh data um in uh in uh Europe
as well. So naturally it makes sense to
have an alternate means of connecting to
the outside world and satellite
communication can play this role.
Satellite communication played a major
role when Russia invaded Ukraine.
Ukraine received access to Starlink
terminals that they used for both civil
and defense purposes to keep things
going even when groundbased networks
were damaged or destroyed. And so the
Ukraine uh invasion really demonstrated
the value of satellite communications.
And since then there's been an effort on
the part of the government to both um
onshore existing international providers
but at the same time also develop an
indigenous satellite communications
constellation that we have sovereignty
over we can task and that we control. So
this is also another very important
aspect. And finally, there's the overall
level of understanding systems
engineering, systems integration, and
our overall competence in these fields.
By being able to develop space systems,
space products, this translates to being
able to handle much more complex systems
engineering projects both for civil and
defense purposes. And again, regardless
of whether we are trying to buy
something from an international provider
or develop it in-house, if we have the
in-house option and capability, it
generally makes it much much easier to
negotiate terms more favorable for us if
we want to buy from an existing
provider.
>> Lauren Chang, thank you so much for
joining Taiwan Talks today.
>> No problem. Thank you very much for
having me.